---
title: "DIPLOMACY"
date: 2020-12-01T19:11:22+02:00
draft: true
---
## II USE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TOOLS IN DIPLOMACY: APPLICATION OF NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING METHODS TO CONTRIBUTE TO A NUMBER OF DIPLOMATIC FIELDS AND FUNCTIONS
Significance and Topicality of the Topic
Several states have now streamlined digital issues into their foreign policies, adopting strategies and appointing designated diplomats to pursue these strategic objectives. “Digital diplomacy” refers to the use of new technologies and social media by diplomats in the context of their traditional activities, including for consular purposes.
Through membership to international organizations, Latvia actively works on global digital agenda. Latvia is one of the world leaders in digital technologies, such as Artificial Intelligence (AI) solutions for translation of small languages, AI for road safety, AI for computer vision along with implementation of 5G mobile technologies and fast, affordable high speed broadband Internet and public WIFI networks.
There are several development documents currently in force in the EU, with a focus on the digital transformation. This includes the EU’s digital strategy, the EU’s strategies for artificial intelligence and data. The EU’s digital strategy aims at making digital transformation for people and businesses, while helping to achieve its target of a climate-neutral Europe by 2050.
The EU’s strategies for artificial intelligence and data aim at encouraging businesses to work with, and develop, these new technologies, while at the same time making sure that they earn citizens’ trust. The EU’s approach to AI, based on trust and excellence, will give citizens the confidence to embrace these technologies while encouraging businesses to develop them.
AI tools may support good foreign policy. AI applications may be appropriate and can provide important opportunities to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, including knowledge management, information collection, monitoring programmes, understanding discourses, and delivering services. In my work, I will focus on how natural language processing methods and solutions could contribute to collecting, analysing, reporting, as well as integrating big data in negotiations and other diplomatic activities. 

Two areas in which big data could benefit diplomacy:
1.	Information gathering and reporting
Information gathering is likely to be one of the areas that will be most affected by big data. Big data opens up new sources and new ways of analysis from social media discourse to government open data, which can contribute to a policy-making strategy. The digitalisation of diplomatic reports provides new opportunities to analyse and detect patterns in the conduct of diplomacy. 

2.	Communication and public diplomacy
The biggest promise of big data in the area of communication concerns the ability to understand patterns and trends in discourse, to tailor messages, and to measure the effectiveness of a communication campaign. Public diplomacy has been adapted to the opportunities of digital technologies, and in particular social media, to become more effective in communicating with foreign and domestic societies. We could use big data and natural language processing tools in new ways and thus promote an understanding of foreign and domestic discourse, as well as improve the effectiveness of their own messages.

AI in the Public Sector 
According to the OECD, “the potential of AI for public administrations is manifold. The development of AI technologies is already having an impact on how the public sector works and designs policies to serve citizens and businesses. Applications touch on areas such as health, transportation and security services…. AI tools could enhance the efficiency and quality of many public sector procedures. For example, they could offer citizens the opportunity to be engaged right up-front in the process of service design and to interact with the state in a more effective and personalised way. If correctly designed and implemented, AI technologies could be integrated into the entire policy-making process, support public sector reforms and improve public sector productivity.” 
Many countries have announced national AI strategies and policy initiatives, which set objectives and targets that require actions agreed by all stakeholders. 
In May 2018, Nordic-Baltic region ministers from Nordic and Baltic countries signed a joint declaration “AI in the Nordic-Baltic Region”. The countries within the region comprise Denmark, Estonia, Finland, the Faroe Islands, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Sweden and the Åland Islands. They agreed to reinforce their co-operation on AI, while maintaining their position as Europe’s leading region in the area of digital development (Nordic, 2018[49]).
The declaration identified seven focus areas to develop and promote the use of AI. First, the countries working on the basis of this declaration have the goal to improve opportunities for skills development so that more authorities, companies and organisations use AI. Second, they plan to enhance access to data for AI to be used for better services to citizens and businesses in the region. They also want to improve infrastructure, hardware, software and data, all of which are central to the use of AI, to be based on standards that enable privacy, security, trust and good usability. The countries will ensure that AI gets a prominent place in the European discussion and implementation of initiatives within the framework of the Digital Single Market. 
For example Estonia is planning the next step of its e-governance system powered by AI to save costs and improve efficiency. It is also experimenting with e-healthcare and situational awareness. Estonia targets the core values of ethics, liability, integrity and accountability. A pilot project was planned in 2018. With StreetLEGAL, self-driving cars have been tested on Estonian public roads since March 2017 and this is the project of the future. 
Qualitative and reliable language resources and natural language processing tools are key elements for research in digital humanities.
The following research connected with my topic was conducted by Marge Käsper, Liina Maurer, who investigated Lexicometry to Study Political Tweets.
Marge Käsper, Liina Maurer   explored the tools, various methods and specific objects of study to discuss subsequently, for a socio-discursive perspective, the Twitter as a mode of communication for a president. According  to their opinion, today the most significant work in lexicometry has been produced by Damon Mayaffre, who has analyzed comparative recurrences and vocabulary patterns in public speeches of all French presidents from de Gaulle to Chirac, and later on up to Emmanuel Macron. Their conclusions may be also useful for my future research as our Ministry analyses different discourses, including political tweets of different countries of the world performed in different languages.
The following important item of the present work is the review of the research titled “Building Machine Translation Systems for Minor Languages: Challenges and Effects” by M.L.Forcada . The author states that “the existence of machine translation systems for minor languages can affect these languages positively. The easier it is to access these systems and the more readily available the data used to create them, the more intense the effects will be. The first effect is Normalisation and visibility… The availability of machine translation between a minor language and a surrounding dominant language can help normalise the minor language, extending its use beyond the family and the home to more formal social contexts, such as schools, the media, government affairs and trade.” This problem is investigated by AI based language technology company Tilde.
Second effect according M.L.Forcada is Literacy. The growing availability of texts in a minor language, obtained thanks to machine translating, post-editing and subsequently preparing materials that were originally written in a dominant language, can fuel efforts to improve literacy amongst speakers within the relevant linguistic community.
Third effect is Standardisation.  “The use of machine translation systems can help to standardise a language by establishing a single writing system, encouraging set spellings, promoting a particular dialect and so on”. The fourth effect is Increased expertise and more available resources.  “Creating a machine translation system for a minor language implies, to a certain extent, reflecting on the language and subsequently specifying and codifying monolingual and bilingual knowledge. As long as it is in an open-source environment, the resulting linguistic expertise will be at the disposal of the entire linguistic community through the publication of new language resources.” 
In conclusion, M.L.Forcada emphasizes that machine translation is one of the computer tools with the greatest potential to enhance language online presence, therefore, making the communication increasingly more digital. Machine translation, which can understand and create content written in another language, may use language resources, such as dictionaries or learn from corpora containing a huge number of already translated sentences.
In the article “Multilingual and Interlingual Semantic Representations for Natural Language Processing” , the authors observe two trends in the fields of computational linguistics and natural language processing. 
The first trend is “a matter of increasing demand for language technologies that serve diverse populations, particularly those whose languages have received little attention in the research community”. Since text summarization, speech recognition, and translation become useful, it is insufficient in our globalized and connected world for these applications to serve only speakers of the lingua franca. Therefore, the growing importance of multilinguality is reflected in the community’s research.
The other trend is “a matter of increasing supply”. The diversity of computational tools has exploded in the past decade. The application of representation learning methods to text corpora has modified the landscape of methods used to develop applications, especially the type of text data and other linguistic resources. 
The area of multilingual natural language processing is developing rapidly, bringing about the semi-automatic creation of a wide-coverage multilingual grammatical framework lexicon as well as hybrid approaches that combine grammatical framework with neural methods.
Latvia
The government aims at leveraging Digital Innovation Hubs (DIH) as a physical platform for implementation. These would serve as a one-stop-shop where firms, public sector organisations and, in particular SMEs, would be offered services in four dimensions: testing, attraction of investors, skill and training, as well as networking and innovation ecosystem. In Latvia, Platform Industry 4.0 would be formally established through the Digital Europe Program (2021-2027), which proposes funds of EUR 9.2 billion to be made available for areas such as supercomputing, artificial intelligence or the build-up and strengthening of the European Digital Innovation Hub network. 
Different value chain ecosystem pilot projects have been under the implementation: (1) ICT (2) Biomedicine; (3) Smart materials, (4) Smart city, (5) BIO economy, and (6) Smart energy
In practice it means development of collaboration platforms bringing together entrepreneurs, research/education institutions and public administration, including Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Latvia has made 5G commercial frequencies available from the 1st of January 2019. The major impact of 5G will be found in almost all sectors of society, from harbours and airports to hospitals and entire cities.
The Baltic Sea Region 5G Ecosystem Forum “5G Techritory” facilitated new partnerships among global and regional information communication technology companies, and other key stakeholders in Europe.
We could mention best examples such as Artificial Intelligence solutions for translation of small languages, AI for road safety, AI for Computer vision along with implementation of 5G mobile technologies and fast, affordable high speed broadband Internet and public WIFI networks.
The implementation of AI solutions has been identified as one of the priorities of public administration.
Language is an essential treasure for Latvia and every European country. Latvia is advancing leadership in multilingual AI technologies. Therefore, it is essential to make sure that European AI is multilingual. It will enable all Europeans to benefit from AI developments, all businesses to provide and use AI based services across borders.
EU Council Presidency Translator developed by our leading language technology company Tilde has supported seven EU Council Presidencies, starting from Latvian. 
Tilde developed a set of multiple domain-specific MT systems for IBM. The systems are used by IBM for translating to and from Danish, Swedish, Finnish, Norwegian, Estonian, Latvian and Lithuanian languages.  Using its MT platform, Tilde was able to boost the quality of the Nordic-language systems through the integration of in-domain terminology.  Tilde’s MT systems have been integrated into IBM’s translation workflows. To facilitate multilingual communication in Europe, Tilde is helping the European Commission to build a pan-European MT infrastructure.
The systems in CEF.AT will be integrated into public online services, such as Europeana, the Open Data Portal, and the Online Dispute Resolution platform.  Tilde applied MT solutions for Graze to provide news monitoring in the Arabic, Chinese, Russian, German, Italian, Spanish and French languages. Kantar TNS and Tilde IT have launched a strategic partnership to develop speech recognition technology for monitoring and analyzing broadcast/ podcast content in Lithuania and Latvia.
Today’s dynamic world with changing external and internal political and economic environment, limited resources, increasing demand from the public to receive high-quality and modern services creates new challenges for the public administration. The public administration needs to evolve and adapt to changing needs, providing effective services and flexible solutions, using innovative approaches. To achieve these goals, it is vital to invest in the intellectual capacity of the public administration and improve its methods and culture of work.
The goal of the project is to develop a common analytical framework for diplomacy related data that could support public servants in the administrative process. 
How Ministry of Foreign Affairs could use machine translation technologies?
In Latvia, European language technology company Tilde has advanced the languages of the three Baltic States in the digital domain. In the last three consecutive years, Tilde has won the World Machine Translation competitions for the translations of Latvian, Estonian and Lithuanian languages that surpass, among others, Google translate services. AI applied to communications between EU institutions and Member States must be accessible in all the EU languages.
According to Tilde (2020), neural machine translation produces more fluent, humanlike translations, substantially boosting the level of MT quality and accuracy.
Neural machine translation has been introduced quite recently under a category of corpus-based machine translation. The main principle of its work is that it keeps track of pairs of source and target language translation in the memory or also database, which are kept until it is needed to use them. As a result, neural machine translation includes many translation pairs.  The basis of neural machines is neural networks that are composed of thousands of artificial units resembling neurons in their output or activation.
It could be very helpful in daily work of diplomats at the MFA and embassies to use new ways of analysis from social media discourse, and to analyse comparative recurrences and vocabulary patterns in public speeches. In this regard, it is important to stress the significance of promoting digital skills of diplomats.  Tilde partnered with the Latvian public administration is creating  a language technology platform with MT, speech, and terminology management functionalities. Platform can be integrated into public governmental websites and systems to ensure dynamic content translation. The next step of the project will be to introduce a set of virtual assistants to improve accessibility to public services.




Source: []()

